# Fine grain Emotion Analysis in Spanish using linguistic features and transformers
Mental health issues are a global concern, with a particular focus on the rise of depression. Depression affects millions of people worldwide and is a leading cause of suicide, particularly among young people. Recent surveys indicate an increase in cases of depression during the COVID-19 pandemic, which affected approximately 5.4\% of the population in Spain in 2020. Social media platforms such as X (formerly Twitter) have become important hubs for health information as more people turn to these platforms to share their struggles and seek emotional support. Researchers have discovered a link between emotions and mental illnesses such as depression. This correlation provides a valuable opportunity for automated analysis of social media data to detect changes in mental health status that might otherwise go unnoticed, thus preventing more serious health consequences. Therefore, this research explores the field of emotion analysis in Spanish towards mental disorders. There are two contributions in this area. On the one hand, the compilation, translation, evaluation and correction of a novel dataset composed of a mixture of other existing datasets in the bibliography. This dataset compares a total of 16 emotions, with an emphasis on negative emotions. On the other hand, the in-depth evaluation of this novel dataset with several state-of-the-art transformers based on encoder-only and encoder-decoder architectures. The analysis compromises monolingual, multilingual and distilled models as well as feature integration techniques. The best results are obtained with the encoder-only MarIA model, with a macro-average F1 score of 60.4771%.


